redeeming is hard reorgs are hard you
can't lump them all into one thing with
you know oh it's all great all the time
no it's not if we could just build the
software deliver to the customer get the
product Market fit hey have we delighted
them or not if only it could be that
easy no we have the people layer so
let's focus there
too today my guest is Heidi helland
after two decades in the tech industry
Heidi became fascinated with how teams
are organized how orc structures change
and how to set teams up for Success
Through that change she now teaches
workshops and runs courses and consults
on how to effectively reorganize your
teams and in her book Dynamic reteaming
Heidi delves deep into why change is
actually good for your teams why you're
better off not having super stable teams
how to effectively execute reorgs and
through that how to reduce attrition
stagnation and knowledge silos in our
conversation Heidi shares the five types
of ring anti patterns to avoid when
making or changes what sort of Team
structure is most conducive to creating
totally new products why being
transparent about your reor plans is
definitely worth considering also how
Heidi became such a great listener with
a lot of really interesting insights and
advice there and so much more huge thank
you to John Cutler for introducing me to
Heidi with that I bring you Heidi
helland after a short word from our
sponsors this episode episode is brought
to you by product Road map. and ignition
product Road map. a is the first AI
roadmapping Suite it helps ensure road
maps Drive Revenue by instantly aligning
product with your sales and marketing
teams to capture upsell opportunities
built by early leaders from Rippling and
craft it automatically identifies
feature gaps from your CRM data and your
customer conversations adds them to
sharable road maps easily prioritized by
Revenue impact and then seamlessly
closes the loop with sales reps via
targeted notifications when feature gaps
are closed as part of ignition's broader
goto Market operating system product
roadmap a can also help create better
handoffs and collaboration with product
marketing teams by giving both teams the
tools to research plan orchestrate and
measure the process of building products
and going to Market packed with
Integrations AI Automation and
communication tools it's truly a
One-Stop shop for product and marketing
to bring things from concept to launch
to sign up go to product m.ai and use
promo code Lenny to get 75% off your
first
year this episode is brought to you by
hex if you're a data person you probably
have to jump between different tools to
run queries build visualizations write
Python and send around a lot of
screenshots and CSV files heex brings
everything together its powerful
notebook UI lets you analyze data in SQL
python or no code in any combination and
work together with live multiplayer and
Version Control and now hex's ai tools
can generate queries and code create
visualizations and even Kickstart a
whole analysis for you all from natural
language prompts it's like having an
analytics co-pilot built right into
where you're already doing your work
then when you're ready to share you can
use hex's Drag and Drop app builder to
configure beautiful reports or
dashboards that anyone can use join the
hundreds of data teams like notion
alltrails Loom mix panel and algolia
using hex every day to make their work
more impactful sign up today at
he. Lenny to get a 60-day free trial of
the hex team plan that's
hexte
Lenny heidy thank you so much for being
here and welcome to the podcast thanks
Lonnie great to be here it's great to
have you here so I had this colleague at
abbb her name was Janna and she always
had this joke that she shared that if
it's been six months and she hasn't
switched teams or hasn't moved desks she
she knew there was this reor coming
there's something happening something
was coming to change everything and you
wrote a whole book about this general
idea of teams changing reorgs you call
it reteaming I have the book right here
it's called Dynamic ret teaming the art
and wisdom of changing teams I feel like
just people underestimate the
opportunities and benefits of change and
I think they we see it as a scary thing
so I'm really excited to spend time with
you and chat about this topic before we
get into the meat of it I'm just curious
why you decided to spend so much of your
time researching this area of Team
change reorgs ret
teaming yeah that's a good question it
wasn't necessarily planned I had been
working in a variety of different fast
growing startups for most of my career
like 20 years in software as a service
companies in
particular and I read a lot of books to
try to get better at my work and what
we're doing in our teams you know I have
a lot right over there as you can see
and a lot of the books I would read on
teams and the advice that I would get
from people would be uh you know you
really want to keep your teams the same
you want to go for that forming storming
norming performing kind of thing and I
had thought about that and I was like
wait well it wasn't really possible for
us when I was at a startup and I was the
10th employee and we grew to 900 people
and now thousands of people our teams
kind of morphed and changed so I feel
like if you're in a fast growing company
or a shrinking company look there don't
look at trying to fight the Natural
Evolution so I I was just trying to
prove a point and to illustrate that
team change and I was also curious to
see well was was that just my experience
and the experience of my colleagues in
Southern California what is it like for
other people so I was just curious you
have this code in your book where you
say something like sure we deliver
software on time we make products people
love and want to buy but there's this
people layer that happens that people
may not be thinking enough about is
there anything more you can say to
that yeah I think a lot of the the
things that I would read about teams you
know just are naturally focused on well
you want to build things that customers
love you want it to be an enjoyable
experience you want to deliver on time
you know there's this there's a reason
we're there as a business but there's
also lot of company building that
happens and building the people
structures and and just kind of you know
when you go from one to many to a
multitude there's a lot of work that
goes into it this is enablement type
work and it's where I've focused a lot
of my time in my career helping make
teams and organizations
successful so there is this people layer
however you know I I've thought about
this a lot over the years and I think it
would be highly convenient if we could
just focus on building products that
people love and and getting product
Market fit talking to customers it would
be great if if it could only be that but
the reality is we're humans together and
there's a lot of opportunity to
build companies that Delight people
where they're excited to be included in
decisionmaking about how the
organization grows and changes or
shrinks so so yeah there's this whole
kind of other area of work that I think
just doesn't get enough attention and I
guess that's where I live and breathe
awesome okay so I definitely want to get
into the five types of redeeming as you
described but before we get there what I
find with reorgs and change is that it
often leads to the biggest career
opportunities because there's new roles
to be filled if things aren't changing
there's not going to be all of a sudden
hey we have this new role that we want
for you and a lot of the I don't know a
lot of the leaders that move up quickly
are the ones that seem to take advantage
of change and think ahead and get
involved and like position themselves in
a way where like okay cool there's a new
position oh clearly it's going to be
Heidi is there anything you can share
there or any advice for people that
maybe see reorgs coming and what they
can do to help themselves in that
pending change I really like it when
there's transparency in reworks uh
there's a story in my book from
Christian Lyall at Spotify about how
they reorg a large infrastructure team
and they visualized it on whiteboards
and brought people over to the
whiteboards to see the future team
structure that that the leaders wanted
and they got input into the design and
we did this at procore as well inspired
by Christian and his story and we had I
think there were like 80 people involved
in this platform organization that was
splitting from two large kind of
clusters of teams into three and we I
remember when we uh we rolled out the
whiteboards from a back office where we
were talking about this change for a few
weeks and it was scary to roll these
whiteboards out because you know it
impacts people's daytoday it's like when
when somebody is suggesting that maybe
you do something different or that
something different happens you know
sometimes it can be kind of kind of
triggering like you want to know what's
going on so anyway
but we had courage together so we rolled
these whiteboards out and it had the
team structure with everyone's names on
it had like the name of the team the
mission of the team how many open slots
for hiring across all of these different
teams and then people's names in their
existing uh Team
positions and people were invited to
look give feedback they identified
mistakes that we had in the design oh
this team might be better over here and
here's why and people had the
opportunity to see opportunities within
their own company that they might say
hey I you know I'm interested in this
might I be considered for this and then
they could have their discussion so I
really like that it the opportunities
were shared and presented so it wasn't
some sort of thing that
happened you know in some kind of back
room you know for the whole time like we
we like unearth
the beginning of a plan I think
sometimes
you you know when you convene people for
a meeting to talk about anything it's
good to have like a starting point so we
had this starting point we had a variety
of different things and I I call it
whiteboard ret teaming in my book and I
and I write about
that and you know there's even
structures that are more open than that
Redgate software in Cambridge UK Chris
Smith is a colleague of mine and they do
uh regular open self- selection ret
teeming activities uh when they're
changing their strategic priorities he
talks about this uh globally very very
interesting space and they it's even
more open than putting the names on the
whiteboards they have teams give pitches
and this is what they're looking for and
they they have a whole method for
enabling people to say hey I'm
interested in this and I I think that
really helps because sometimes you might
think oh no one's going to want to work
on this but people can be delighted by
working on things that another person
doesn't think are particularly
interesting so giving choice is
important and and there are you know
again there are different grades of
transparency we weren't up for doing
this kind of open open ret teeming self-
selection event but we were open to the
Whiteboard variant I imagine individual
employees hearing this of just like
being involved in the reorg strategy
sounds amazing Executives and leaders
hearing this are probably really afraid
and feel like there's no way this can
work well and so what I want to
understand is how do you actually how do
you actually set this up for Success
what I'm imagining when you do this is
many people disagree there's teams
people want to join there's teams people
don't want to join it seems like there's
a consensus challenge where do you wait
for everyone to agree does someone end
up making decision does it distract
everyone from the work they're doing
when you're kind of involving everyone
in the reorg versus what typically
happens secretly planned amongst
Executives no one knows it's coming and
I think the reason they do that is
because they don't want to distract
anyone and they don't want anyone to
start freaking out until it's like
here's the final plan here's what we're
doing so what other advice do you have
for people that want to practice this
way of ret teaming and reorg where they
involve the actual team in the plan um
there's a book by William Bridges called
uh transitions managing life's changes I
have it right here making sense of
life's changes he talks about endings
neutral zone and New Beginning you know
ending you're going through a change
your team is changing neutral zone the
period of kind of liminality where
you're like gosh I don't know how this
is going to go you're not quite
comfortable you're not quite in that new
reality yet you're still thinking about
what it was like before and you know
once you're in that new reality you know
and leaders can you know paint the
vision and picture about the benefits of
the new reality and the purpose and why
we're here and anchor to that to try to
raise positivity but once I learned
about that transition framework going
through any subsequent changes myself
became a lot easier to grasp and you
know it really kind
of uh it changes in in any part of your
life I mean his book is not written
about soccer development or product
development
you know sometimes we're going to have a
say we're going to be able to
participate sometimes we're not and
being clear on who the decision maker is
in a change is really important there's
another framework that I really like I
don't think it's in my book but I've
written about it in my new book but it's
called ride and we had a chief people
officer a procore and she's now at ukg
Pat Waters she taught us um the
framework for decision-making Clarity
and it's who's requesting the change who
can give input to the change who's the
decider on the change and who's going to
execute on the change so it's like r i d
and I googled this for a while I
couldn't find anything on it and
encouraged her to write about it and I
credit her to that Pat water she's
awesome and you know so a lot of the
times it's kind of like you know what
are you dealing what what's the problem
you're going to solve you have a a
current state and a future
State okay and that future State might
be up to discussion but maybe it's not
depending on what it is right you're
gonna you're you're getting acquired
like you're probably not going to have a
standup meeting and talk about should we
get acquired or not no you're not part
of that decision right so and then how
is a Change
Gonna gonna get rolled out or how are we
going to do it you know in other cases
at the team level maybe you have a
retrospective and you determine hey you
think would be a bit more effective and
would be able to deliver you know at a
better Cadence if we were two teams
instead of one team and if teams have
the ability to talk about that and
impact and have some agency into how
their their part of the org evolves and
changes I think that could be really
cool I think that could be really
empowering I think that could help us
feel more ownership in that company that
we're in it doesn't always have to be
like you know decision- making equals
hierarchy or the person at the top
doesn't have to be like that but again
like redeeming is hard rears are hard
you can't lump them all into one thing
with you know oh it's all great all the
time no it's not it's not um but but
anyway we need to focus there we got to
focus on this people layer because you
know retaining is inevitable we might as
well get better at it because we're
going to have to deal with it if we
could just build the software deliver to
the customer get the product Market fit
hey have we delighted them or not if
only it could be that easy no we have
the people layer so let's focus there
too on this transparent collaborative
raming final question here is just would
you recommend time boxing this so that
it doesn't suck up everyone's brain
power for weeks and weeks and weeks or
is it very dependent
okay is there is there advice you have
on how long make a schedule I bias
towards shorter as opposed to longer you
don't want to deliberate on this forever
because especially as you include more
people you know it it can it can be
distracting so you want to like proceed
as expediently as you
can okay let's talk about the types of
raming this kind of the core of your
book and we haven't even gotten there
yet so you've identified there's five
ways teams change can you just walk
through them help people understand what
they are and then I'd also we use this
term reorg a lot in this conversation I
think that's the way most people think
about change after we go through this
list like what is or refer to when it's
maybe from the perspective of these five
ways of teams changing sure okay so the
five uh patterns of
raming one by one someone joins your
company or someone leaves your company
grow and split it's a growth pattern
teams grow bigger and then they split
into two or more
teams opposite of grown split is merging
sometimes two or more teams merge
together it's more of a shrinking
pattern we might be seeing more of this
these days as companies downsize things
merge together and
consolidate
isolation is or innovation by isolation
start a new team off to the side a
beneficial Silo give that team process
Freedom great for catalyzing new product
Lines within your existing company also
great for emergencies and they just
happen anyway if we have incidents and
people have to come together to solve an
incident and then go back to their teams
and switching so switching is moving
from one team to another team you can do
this at a variety of cadences shortterm
longterm and then difference between a r
teaming and a reorg I think reorg is a
word that has very traditional baggage
and
connotations and when I was writing
Dynamic R
teing it just didn't feel like an
appropriate word to use for well um you
know uh Sue is looking to learn a little
bit about how our web operations work
she's going to move to that team it
doesn't it didn't feel appropriate to
call that a reorg because Sue is moving
and switching from one team to the next
I think reorg you know again it's tra
reorganization is a traditional word it
implies on the large it implies tap down
changes that you have no Sayan it's just
it's it's something different than what
I consider raming which is these five
patterns that happen at different
levels awesome so let me just repeat
back these five so one one by one
basically people joining your team
leaving your team something very natural
people do all the time your company or
or your
company yep uh growing splitting team
gets really large and then it's like
okay let's just split this into two
focus them on specific things instead of
this one team trying to cover too much
merging teams the opposite of that
isolation I want to chat about that one
a little more where you just have a team
off to the side and they're just like
dedicated to something
that you find really important so with
isolation you have this awesome story of
your time at a company called expert
city which turned into something people
know most likely and ended up being a
great outcome because of this ret
teeming into an isolation team could you
talk about that yeah so I've I've been
at different startups that have grown
bigger and one of them I was the 15th
employee I started as a web editor and
became an interaction designer and we
were going to change the world and it
was very exciting we were in Santa
Barbara California so the company's
called expert City and we were working
on our first product which was a
Marketplace for tech support so imagine
you have a problem on your computer you
can go to our website and then you can
select an expert to see and control your
screen to help you solve your tech
support Challenge and so we had the
screen sharing technology that we were
inventing in the company we had the
web-based software to manage the Interac
ction between the customer and the
expert we had the experts we had
in-house experts and then you know the
vision was Global worldwide experts we
were going to be like this Marketplace
this like eBay of services is what we
talked about in the early days and I was
like really into this this is my first
job in Tech and I became an interaction
designer working on kind of front-end UI
flows with uh Engineers it's actually
before the word interaction design
designer I was like my title was like
navigation designer we made this up so I
was very into like it was before the
words like ux and other things people
were talking about information
architecture and and and other sub
genres of design and we had individual
offices I had all the interaction flows
on my walls I was you know really into
the words and and one day I was like in
there and we were working on a new flow
we had all these hopes and dreams for
this product
and the CEO came into my office and he
said Heidi we are uh stop working on the
marketplace we're not going to do that
product anymore we're killing it because
nobody's buying it and like made six
bucks or something last month and he
said go to the beach you know we were
Buy Santa bar I'm like what do you mean
go to the beach he's like well I don't
want you to start any work that you're
going to have to maintain later as we
figure out our next step and I was like
okay okay so I remember that day and I'm
looking around my office at all these
flows on the walls so like really like
you know these were domains like kind of
like domain driven design it was like
all these like web domains and which
inter C you know which user interactions
were were going to happen and all these
hopes and dreams and it was the first
time in my career where something was
you know we were told not to work on
something and it was it it wasn't paused
you know some people say we're going to
pause this and then they never get back
to it this thing was like V and I didn't
get it I I I just didn't get it I cried
I was like I like acted out I like sent
this email like how can we kill the
marketplace it must live you know I was
like like it was it was it was quite an
experience um but then and I don't know
what the timing was I was invited to be
on this team off to the side
and there was Market validation going on
we became like the the our Founders and
product and others became students of
Market validation four steps The
Epiphany so we had built this thing we
spent all this time on this Marketplace
but nobody would buy it and so it was
like do or die I mean we had to shift
this was like before lean's startups so
for Subs Epiphany was the was the book
it was the manual it was like The
Guiding the way and so there were people
that had a ton of conversations with
potential customers about this new thing
that we were going to build right right
and it uh so I was invited to be at this
team off to the side and there was a
small team and we didn't have to do
waterfall software development we were
freed from that we were like liberated
from that we got to work in other ways
and I remember you know working with an
engineer and like we were figuring out
how to
like create a forgot password flow
because like none of these patterns
existed you know back then and and like
we got to do this stuff we got to deploy
like you know
more frequently and the product was
called go to my PC where you could see
and operate someone's computer from a
distance and that you know was
essentially the pivot that I feel like
saved the company later we went on we
got folded back into the teams and we
built go to meeting and go to webinar I
was a technical project manager at that
time and yeah so taking a team off to
the side giving that team process
Freedom they didn't want us distracted
from the drag from the you know when
you're working on an existing product
line you you get this Cadence and it be
can become a mature Cadence you know
maybe people working two weeks or one
week now but when you're working on
something new you need faster iteration
loops and our Founders knew that mate
you know so so it was a privilege and I
was like delighted to be part of this
other team and and yeah it was really
really exciting so then looking back
over the years I was like yeah you know
isolated teams beneficial silos you know
again it's going against Green of what
some of these books say oh you want to
desilo everything no sometimes there's a
reason why you have a problem you want
to solve the problem this was like like
were we gonna I mean was this company
gonna go under like I didn't think of
those kind of things at the time because
I was just super into the work and and
very passionate and motivated about what
we were building but uh yeah isolation
pattern came up and and we used it at
another startup as well and you know
ever since
so so yeah that's the story of of expert
City and from my perspective you know
that's different people have different
Vantage points but you know this that if
we would have stayed within our teams
and we would have had to develop with
Pixel Perfect mockups done in Photoshop
like here you go I I don't think we
would have uh been fast enough I don't
like that was not good for the IND that
we needed so it's it's like also like
Innovation by isolation like it's good
for emergencies you know I was at
another startup we had performance
issues with our first product people
went
into left teams went to we brought a
consultant in went into a conference
room for a couple of weeks figured out
some major changes that needed to happen
solve them went back to the teams this
is not a New Concept the Chicken
McNugget was saved by an isolated team
SWAT team um um there's a book called
teamwork it's an old book from I think
the 70s I have in my bookshelf here and
there's a story of the Chicken McNugget
that you can read about where they
brought in a consultant and had a very
small team and worked in a different
they didn't work in their same like
plant where they were developing the
product they worked in a different plant
they reported straight up to one of the
executives at McDonald's and yeah the
Chicken McNugget uh lived on because it
was like having challenges in the in the
test Marketplace in Indianapolis so you
know it's we didn't make this up it's
just like some of these things are kind
of like oh it's like a noticing and then
you're like oh that's pattern so it's
collection there's this idea of a
startup within a big company everyone's
like oh it's just like the startup
within a big company it's all the we
have all the resources that we need
there's no less risk but we can innovate
and try new things rarely does it feel
like it work out you're sharing stories
where it does is there anything you
found or any advice for how to actually
be successful in this idea of having a
team off to the side doing something
Innovative and different at AppFolio we
did this so there's a company called
secure docs um it branched off into its
own company and it was just acquired I
believe in
2022 when secur dox was happening I was
not on that team I was like I was on the
other teams and I was watching and again
same pattern a team was created off to
the side and they were given process
Freedom they worked in more of a of a
daily Sprint style as opposed to the two
we Sprint style that our other teams
were doing at the time at app folio
early
AppFolio and so one isolate the team or
put them in a different area we could
still see them we were in this big open
room but they were it was their team
area I mean we had these like
impermanent walls uh between some of the
teams like it was their region and they
claimed it and they named themselves
and so one you know separate location
there's another story in the book about
a team that incubated uh product idea
within Citrix and they were in a garage
of all places so they were like really
isolated but just put the team in a
different region make it that area
that's number one number two tell other
people not to disturb this team that's
key and hearing it from a leader is
really really important no you're not
going to pull them into something else
they're working on this other thing so
you know people need to shed their skin
of the other things that they're working
on if you take a bigger picture kind of
forest through the trees picture you
want people pairing and switching pairs
so they're not single owners of the
system so when they have an opportunity
to do something that could be really
important to the company like be on one
of these isolated teams they can kind of
fade out and not be the only owner that
has to transfer knowledge and then field
questions for two years on how that
system works you want to build this
redundancy in your teams right so that's
like if you really want to plan ahead do
that first you know have that as part of
how you operate building this team
redundency and
switching because then it frees people
to not be the only owner of a system and
chain to a system and yeah so isolate
them tell people not to bother them um
do pairing and have shared ownership so
it's easier for somebody to switch into
something like
this process Freedom again and they can
do things differently ideally they
report up to someone that
has that really has decision making
Authority and decisions won't get
reversed or they have to go through some
complex like web of like is it okay if
we do this no like you you need kind of
like a clear decision-making structure
they saw that at the McDonald's case
study as well which is not in my book
but it's in this other book called
teamwork and then you know that group
having that you know senior leader that
they report into you know getting the
clear lines of communication there is is
also really important so not having this
you know like heavyweight like
bureaucracy of I don't know quarterly
business updates where everybody's like
making a slide deck for two years before
they go to that meeting like like trying
to like relieve the team of things like
that and kind of make it lighter and
yeah you know and some of these teams
like secure dos became like another
product at at folio was very very
successful at one point I think it was
before we went public it branched off
into its own separate entity I think
maybe they shared a like a board member
or something I don't know how that
worked but it became its own entity
secure docs became separate and then it
grew from there and then it became this
like you know Wonderful successful uh
product that that was recently L
acquired you know people come and go uh
at companies and companies grow and
change and morph and you know that was
like one case of Departures you know
that you know it's like that are sweet
right you're happy for your friends and
colleagues say oh there he's going to be
a CTO it's going to be the CTO like
there's this entity I I remember
visiting their office in Santa Barbara
you know it's great to to see your
friends succeed and Thrive and and you
know we we developed other companies in
that way so
awesome I think it's really nice to hear
there's many success stories of this
idea of this of a mini little startup
within a company and these are really
good tips this episode is brought to you
by HRS many of you already know HRS as
one of the top tools for search engine
optimization it's used by thousands of
seos and companies like IBM Adidas and
eBay what you may not know is that
there's a free version that was made
with small website owners in mind it's
called hre's webmaster tools it's free
and it can help you bring more traffic
to your website HS Web Master tools will
show you keywords that you rank for and
backlinks that you can get it also
performs automated site audits to find
what issues prevent your website from
ranking higher on Google every detected
issue comes with a detailed explanation
and advice on how to fix it visit
hrs.com
awt set up a free account connect your
website and start improving it that's
ahrefs.com
awt
I feel like to me one of the most
important ones you've talked on this is
having an executive essentially
sponsoring this team and supporting and
protecting it versus you know some
managers just like now we're going to go
do this off to the side because
otherwise No One's Gonna really take
that
seriously yeah I I think that's really
really important you know I will also
say that you know things don't always
succeed 100% I I I've seen isolated
teams uh within companies where someone
has has the opportunity to sell
something they talk to their friends who
are the engineers who build the feature
for them but then it leaves something
for other people to maintain later and
they weren't involved in the decisions
and it can be a big mess you know for
all of these patterns there are it's
like kind of like balconies and
basements there's you know you can screw
it up too you know it's not all you know
stuff is hard you know that's why I I
like to lean into it and have written
about it you know things take effort you
you gotta the the tree is going to drop
the leaves and you got to sweep them up
you know it's it everything takes work
and effort so we've talked about the
isolation pattern I thought it'd be good
to talk through the rest of the patterns
real quick and share maybe one or two
tips for how to be successful or make it
work well or better sure before you
start I actually I think I missed a
nuance and you corrected me but I think
I missed it which is for the one-on-one
pattern it's actually describing joining
the company specifically not joining a
team is that right yeah and in the book
I it might be a little blurred because
this is like some of
the switching in one by one sound very
similar and they do have some like kind
of vend diagram overlaps but I'll
distinguish them as I talk about them
cool so yeah so one by one someone joins
your company or they leave your company
right so the tip with one by one is when
someone joins help them build a sense
feel a sense of belonging and you can do
that through not having their first day
be them sitting over there alone right
you could have someone have a first pair
there's a chapter in my book about
onboarding this is in the space of of
onboarding also with one by one when
people join you also need to pay
attention to the people who are already
there and it's good for them to know
when someone is joining the company that
it shouldn't be a surprise so
visualizing the hiring and the
opportunities is is is something that I
think is a really good idea it could be
challenging for someone if somebody
joins and they become their manager but
what if that person wanted to be the
manager and then they brought in someone
from the outside to become the manager
right so you need to pay attention to
the new hires that are joining help them
feel a sense of belonging get them to
talk about themselves which is said to
increase their sense of connection and
retention there's some research in the
book the culture code by Daniel Coyle
which talks about that but then it's
also important to coach the people
through change that are already at the
company right especially if they weren't
involved in the particular decision
bringing on this new leader that comes
in and brings in all their people right
so you got to pay attention to to to
different people grow and split is a
natural thing that happens when you're
like startup scale up and growing bigger
and bigger the first team probably goes
grows bigger and then splits into two or
three so when the team gets bigger
facilitation and communication tends to
break down so some signals that teams
might bring up when they feel like a
change might be helpful is the meetings
are taking longer you're in that case
where it's harder to make
decisions it was easier when there were
like five of us but now they are
13 the work becomes Divergent
they're working on this one thing
they're working on something else no
one's paying attention in the standups
so much anymore because this work has
diverged and those are a few of the
signals and then someone typically
brings it up if you normalize the idea
that it's okay for teams to have input
into their future structures maybe
they'll bring it up and and decide that
hey it might be better if we split
sometimes splitting though can create
dependencies that weren't there when you
were together as one team so you inherit
other problems or you might inherit
challenges like all right the team
decides it's more effective if they
split into two or three we just have one
product manager we just have one
designer we just have one person who
helps us anticip anticipate quality
challenges so you know it's a lot of
problem trading when you do a lot of
this stuff like anything you know you
have a challenge how might we solve it
well there's option a option b and
option see okay so gr this grown split
so then and it's very common I think
when your company is growing and
changing kind of like
that merging is the opposite of grow and
split two or more teams combin together
or at a higher level a company acquires
another company and there's like a
merging that happens
so merging I think is related to when
companies downsize or Shrink things
consolidate come together or again when
at the company level you know companies
combine you know one acquires another
gets acquired how that goes down varies
but uh there's this concept called
panarchy that I write about in my book
that a lot of these changes there
changes you know at the individual level
the team level the team of teams level
department level the company level so
yeah so merging so there's a business
decision that the companies merge
together and then ch es might ensue so
maybe the company wants to get ahead on
building and having another vertical in
their SAS company we acquired a company
at AppFolio to bring us faster
into workflow software for law firms so
we acquired a company based in San Diego
and that got us a couple of years ahead
I remember one of the the leaders saying
that so you know again we weren't
involved I wasn't involved in this
decision as as an IC at the time time so
it could be a business decision for
emerging at that level it could be that
people leave there are departures and
teams and responsibilities consolidate
together uh that's merging so could be
that kind of shrinking that we're seeing
it could be that the company is having
one leader instead of three and there's
a consolidation and the teams kind of
merge together so it's the opposite of
grow and split one activity I do like to
do with team that merge is called story
of our team that's in Chapter 13 of the
second edition so with story of our team
each team makes a timeline of they they
stand in order of when they joined their
team and they make a m they make a
timeline with Milestones of when they
joined their team when people left and
significant events and things they
created that they're excited about and
that they're proud of and that they
Branch together with their newly merged
team and then it's good for to to get a
shared sense of History so you have
these teams or companies that come
together they make shared timelines they
share their milestones and things that
they built that they're proud of they
tell each other about it and then they
have a sense of like wow like we didn't
know that oh I didn't know that you have
built a system like that we we did too
or we've never built anything like that
that is so cool like you know what did
you learn from that you know we get to
learn about each other and then we're
together we like all right you know
we're this merged entity now like what's
next like looking out to the Future so
we have the same shared Vision so I love
doing that there's different tactics you
can do before during and after each of
these patterns yeah so that's merging
isolation we talked about before put the
team off to the side give them process
Freedom have them report up to a
decision maker tell the other teams not
to bother them let them work at the
Cadence that they want to work at that
makes it easier if you are doing a
short-term thing you got to work it out
with the larger entity so you don't
create something in isolation that other
people have to maintain like you know
there's there's ways you that this can
be messed up and then switching so
switching
pattern is really tied to Learning and
Development and fulfillment it could be
that you want to work with other people
like you know forming storming norming
performing tuckman's model he forgot the
phase called stagnating sometimes it
feels like we're in a team for too long
we're tired of working with these people
we want a little variety we want to work
with that person over there or maybe we
want to work on a new system we don't
have the opportunity to do that in our
current team but what if we could work
on that system over there with those
people it could totally refresh us it
could be like having a new job within
our same company it could extend and the
lifespan of the amazing employee in your
company right so switching is tied to
that kind of fulfillment which is one of
the reasons why I made it separate from
one by one and tied that to the company
and the other thing with switching is
that you could create safety nets in
your company through switching I just
wrote a newsletter post about this uh
yesterday because you know maybe we're
going to have some more changes this
year maybe companies are going to be
hiring
less I don't like the thought of
companies downsizing or having layoffs
or anything like that but you know I I
think to myself
well have multiple owners of a system so
not only one person is that Tower of
knowledge that owns that one system
there's some stories in my book where I
interviewed Richard Sheridan who is the
chief Storyteller and co-founder of a
wonderful company called meno
Innovations in anber Michigan
they built their company meno to have
people work in pairs not just the
software Engineers team members work in
pairs and they switch pairs at a regular
Cadence and you know that when you're
joining the company because you're
involved in some kind of pairing so
there's parody from when you're
interviewing to when you're at the
company but switching also helps build
that knowledge redundancy in your
company a little more fault tolerance so
if someone leaves they don't leave with
that all the information in their head
we had that we had at that first startup
expert City we had that some single
owners of systems and when they left it
it it just becomes a challenge and a
setback and at the second you know at at
folio we share a we shared a Founder um
between the first startup and the second
startup many of the early Engineers from
that first startup went to the second
startup right so I was 10th at AppFolio
I was 15th at expert city so we wanted
to work together right so was that you
know Global idea of you know switching
in one by one or similar but but anyway
at the second startup we had the chance
to do things differently so we had
pairing and switching Pairs and test
driven development we had help to do
that but this kind of redundancy built
safety into our systems especially when
you know AppFolio is processing a lot of
rent payments there's a lot of money
there's a going through you know those
are critical systems and it's very
important that that that things are safe
and secure you know you don't want to
haphazardly switch people around you can
screw this up you know again that
balconies and basements concept you
don't want you know somebody over here
they will switch every two weeks and
have no say in their team like you can
like you know there's ways to to screw
all of this up you know but there's
other ways to do it well I remember you
know when we were at our first team at
AppFolio and we we did a grow split
right like it grew and it split into two
or three teams and remember there was a
loss for some of the engineers who
wanted to pair program with some of the
other engineers and they started a
regular
rotation themselves from one team to the
next right and that brought fulfillment
it brought Joy I mean they would see
each other in the in the work space
every day but they wanted to work
together it brought them learning joy
and fulfillment and I love that for
those who are like keep the team stable
and the same forever I'm like well well
what about that like it it it brings me
satisfaction and joy when I see my
colleagues you know it's like autonomy
Mastery purpose it's like Dan Pink's
book drive when people are really like
given some agency and the and the
opportunity to work a little bit
differently than maybe that you know
traditional boxed version you might see
on my bookshelf you know it it you can
really create not only products that
people love but companies that people
love and and want to be at
so all these stories of Team changes and
reorg it made me think about a a quote
that one of my managers always used to
say about reorg and changing teams is
that there's no perfect org structure
there's only the best idea you have at
the time for what the org could be and
then there's the issues with that org
that you identify as you're putting in
place and then set up processes and
systems around to try to catch that like
dependencies as you said or overlap of
ownership is there anything along those
lines that comes up of just things you
found of just like there's never going
to be the perfect way to do it this is
just our best idea at the time and
here's how we deal with the downsides of
this approach yeah I think there's a lot
of wisdom to to what your manager said
and your colleague there because yeah I
mean as time goes on conditions change
you know we evolve and change we're
subject to different influences
Co happens we weren't dealing with that
10 years ago you know we we grow and
adapt and morph we try to get together
and make the best decisions that we can
when we're faced with
challenges and and yeah you know a lot
of it is problem trading you know we
have this challenge
today we decide oh there's a few ways we
could handle this pros and cons of each
solution and let's you know it's like
the it's it's like the Kata it's like
the Toyota Kata you know like grasp the
current condition you will experience
you know you have challenges what's the
next Evolution or the next Target
condition how might you get there and
then you're there and you're like okay
grasp the current Target condition
what's it like what you know what are
you experiencing oh we might try this
you get to you know it's always we're
always transforming from the current
state to the Future state so you know to
that I would would ask people well how
do you want that to be and how do you
want to show up and be as a leader right
you want to just be like all right you
know got to get this done the reorg is
done by an email and we're just sending
it out you know or this small team
change and here it is it's done goodbye
you know or is it a little bit where you
get people's input you know it and that
in itself you gotta away you know what
you're dealing with you know
again but uh but I like to think about
that like what kind of leader do you
want to be leaders need
patience it's hard to be a leader it's
challenging you know but what what kind
of environment or Vibe do you want to
cultivate in your teens and what do you
want the people to be like you know I I
I have a a a degree in teaching English
and pli Linguistics and I remember
studying like Paulo fer and other
educational problem closing methods of
Education right we have these teams that
solve these complex problems and
challenges and build these really cool
things for customers let's involve them
in some of the or org decisions that are
going to be like part of their daily
life I really I like that idea you know
again it's not perfect you can't involve
people on everything especially if
there's you know widescale changes that
that you just can't along these lines of
doing things badly sometimes you have
this whole section on anti-patterns of R
teaming I think there's about five of
them I don't know if you have these all
top of mine but if you do I'd love to
hear some anti- patterns yeah well one
of them is people always think that
raming is you have a pool of people and
you're assigning them to a bunch of
different projects like okay you'll work
10% on this one 5% on this one 20% on
this one we are going to allocate the
resources from our component-based teams
into these different projects I live
that that we did that in waterfall like
many years ago you know but that doesn't
really work a lot of the times the
percentages don't add up it's very hard
for people to multitask and be involved
in like multiple efforts at once it's
hard for for the brain with all the all
the contact switching that that needs to
happen in that case so I call that the
percentage anti pattern there's also I
probably wrote about it like poof you're
poof they're gone or like suddenly
they're here like you know ret teaming
or having people suddenly show up and
you weren't expecting them or suddenly
they're gone and there's no
communication around it whatsoever
that's another anti pattern one of the
ones I love is this idea spreading High
performers this idea of we're going to
spread the high performers across other
teams that's an AppFolio story John
Walker um was telling me uh back in the
day that yeah he he had this thought I
mean he did this experiment he had this
thought that you know maybe if like we
had this one team that was like I guess
they were deling at this Cadence that
they love and they were building this
stuff and there's this energy and you
can almost feel it like let's just
spread the people from that team across
the other ones and then we'll have that
and it didn't work like you didn't have
that like it didn't happen and that was
a visceral learning for him that it
doesn't essentially work you know and
and you know people are like like you
know what does it take to be a high
performing team right like what what
does it take to have that magical team
experience where there's that chemistry
and and the people are together and
there's stories in the book Damon
valenzona told was telling me one about
how it's like it's a band and we're
ripping off each other and like there's
we're creating this music together so
you know John felt like he essentially
destroyed that when he split up split up
that
team um so that's you know the story
that inspired that anti pattern the
reason people are worried about R teams
and reorgs is this ex a lot of times
this exact
reason that you just shared which is our
team is amazing why would I don't want
it to change I don't want to split I
don't want to add anyone I don't want to
remove anyone I guess is there anything
else along those lines to help people
make feel better about no this is
actually going to be okay Andor it's
inevitable you're not gonna it's not
going to last I think sometimes you have
that awesome team situation it's an
enjoyable experience people are learning
you're looking forward to it every day
you're delivering this stuff that people
love you're telling people what's going
on you're
you know you have that matched
expectation where people aren't like
breathing down your neck because it's
late or something you know sometimes you
want to keep that team together you
don't want to destroy that Dynamic but
the thing is you know maybe that's a
small startup that grows and you need to
grow because you have a bigger vision
and it needs to be more than these 10
people and so you know there there is
sometimes this feeling of loss like this
is our company this is my experience at
this company of 10 people but suddenly
we're 20 people it doesn't feel the same
like it did anymore and it feels it
feels different and people always they
always ask the question how do we
maintain our culture it feels different
than it was before and the thing is it
is different and our companies go
through stages the company of today is
not the company it was a year ago the
people turn over and change what we work
on turns over and change you know the
whole kind of world and and Industry and
you Global events change and put
different pressures on us and you know
we got to live in this cont Global
context so nothing lasts and I sometimes
I have like a picture of myself with an
or like holding an ice cream cone that's
melting you know not to be a total
Downer but you know it appreciate it
when you're on a team and you love it
and it's amazing because you know it
these are our lives and you know we we
have to have gratitude and appreciate
what we have because naturally things
evolve and change it's it's just
inevitable so we appreciate what we have
a lot of us can look back on our careers
and remember those times when we were in
my case skipping through the Halls
because I was so happy and I and it was
like I couldn't even tell you like well
why was I skipping through the Halls at
that moment what was it what was the
people and the conditions and what we
were doing R in like the time the era
almost because because yeah it does
change there's a book by sakadas called
managing corporate life cycles it's one
that many of us read um for years at at
folio maybe the previous company as well
the adus Institute influenced some of
our leaders and you know they influenced
us with this and it talks about the
different stages of companies from birth
and you know there's goo stage maturity
death of companies you know these are
like life cycles like you know the
company grows and changes and morphs and
changes the people in the teams do that
as well I have an ecycle in my book
where I talk about that kind of aging
and changing then there's a disruption
and you have a new beginning you know
we're we're part of these stories that
are in
progress this is not an unchanging
unmoving kind of entity that we work in
so just be kind be kind to each other
enjoy your experiences and learn as much
as you can it reminds me of a advice
Cheryl Sandberg shared when she came to
the Airbnb offices someone asked her
what advice do you have to deal with all
this constant change Like the quote I
shared at the top of the episode of like
every six months there's a massive reorg
our culture is changing teams keep
changing it's constant flux what is your
advice to deal with that and her advice
was like that is good the fact that
you're growing so fast and having to
change is the best case scenario because
the alternative is you not growing and
it's much harder and much more painful
because the changes are much harder
people get let go you business may go
away so her advice is just this is good
change means things are and growth
growth leads to change especially
hypergrowth and that you should
appreciate this time versus be afraid of
it and think that it's a
negative yeah and it seems like she she
had such a wide vantage point and could
kind of see the forest Through the Trees
of the fact that oh this company's doing
well right and this is why we're growing
and changing and I remember one of one
of my leaders CTO John Walker you know
EP folio he told me that once too he was
like you know I'd be like having a
problem or something and I'd come to him
and he'd always say to me it's always he
great to be at a successful company
Heidi and you know it's like well yeah
like sometimes you don't think about the
finances when you're in your daytoday
and you have a problem with another
person or they come to you and they have
a problem with this other person you
know but in the grand scheme of it like
how is the company doing like it it's
really like a critical vantage point
that we need to remind ourselves of but
yeah you know I I I wouldn't say all
change is always good uh your mileage
may vary there but the general idea that
uh the company's doing well you're
growing and changing you're trying to
make things happen happen I I think it's
definitely a space I'd rather be in than
the
opposite yeah and I think it's
especially true for people that haven't
worked at a company that didn't work out
where they think this is sucks and
really this is like pretty good compared
to all the things that could be
happening yeah yeah definitely so we you
know we coach and help each other as as
we go along so final question before we
get to a very exciting lightning round
used to work with John Cutler who was a
pre previous guest on this podcast and
he had a question that he wanted me to
ask you he said that Heidi is one of the
best listeners I've ever worked with and
so the question is what what's your
secret to being a good
listener well listening is a muscle to
build and to always work on you got to
put your attention out focus on the
other person you know sometimes like if
I'm looking down maybe I like reconnect
and and look at them you got to read
body language and other things I'm
trained as a co-active coach which
involves different levels of listening
so you have level one which is internal
listening like if you and I are talking
but I'm thinking about like what am I
going to have for lunch I'm in level one
I've got to redirect it out to you and
focus on you so when I focus on you is
I'm in level two listening I'm like
putting my attention out and I'm like
really anchoring towards you it's a
coaching skill right and then level
three is like Global listening
Environmental
Listening if a marching band suddenly
walked behind you I'm going to point
that out because it's in my field I'm
not going to ignore that I'm going to
bring that up right so we pay attention
to kind of the vibe and the feel in the
room and and where we're at but then
also if if you're talking about
something and suddenly you go like this
or you you have this kind of sudden pain
in your neck when you're talking about
this one thing I might notice that
you're doing this and like touching your
neck because that's information that's a
kind of listening
and so I might ask you about that or if
the face turns red or um you look down
or away it's another kind of listening
so co-active training institute coactive
domcom is my coactive coaching training
so I learned it from them Henry kimsey
house
and wow that is an awesome answer
there's like real a lot of depth there
so coactive decom I'm going to check
that out so you actually got trained in
this skill okay that's great that'll
make people feel better they're like
okay okay amazing I'm gonna I'm gonna
check this out I'm gonna try to be a
better listener through the rest of this
podcast episode from these tips I will
say that sometimes I am not a good
listener
though yeah so it goes Heidi is there
anything else you wanted to touch on or
share before we get to our very exciting
lightning
round I don't think so I I really
appreci apprciate your questions and
talking with you well we reached our
very exciting lightning round are you
ready yeah all right first question what
are two or three books that youve
recommended most to other people leading
intelligent teams is one liberating
structures is another one and of course
transitions by William Bridges I also
like the leader guide to participatory
decision making is there a favorite
recent movie or TV show that you've
really enjoyed I did like the bear the
um
cooking uh related show the restaurant
related show and talks about the
hospital gets into the hospitality
industry I really like that I I was you
know movies I I there isn't really one
that stands out I always look forward to
being on an airplane to see what movies
are playing but no movie for you what is
a favorite interview question that you
like to ask people that you are
interviewing I always like to ask people
well why do you want to join our company
what is it about working with us that
would be exciting for you like why our
company as opposed to another one what
do you look for in their answer that is
a good sign you know they have some uh
knowledge about what we do what what we
build maybe they have bring up that
they've noticed something on one of the
websites or a product la launch that we
just announced just that maybe it's part
of their story and their career they're
going in this direction and and they
heard about us and you know they thought
wow I I would love to work on that is
their favorite product you recently
discovered that you really love I'm very
into vintage clothing and
specifically like
real wool cashmere not synthetic Blends
i al like vintage Blazers a lot of the
times where I'm um giving a talk I'm
wearing a vintage Blazer I really like
the clothing and design and I kind of
you know really really love unusual
vintage pieces that I could find but
they they do need to you know a lot of
the fast fashion that's out there today
is a lot of these blends with these
materials that you've never heard of but
there's like something special about
like you know vintage Cashmere for
example you have a source for some good
stuff is it like eBay is it stores
locally is there a site is there
something you find finding some good
stuff I I travel around the world and I
give talks on raming I do workshops and
usually I go to Vintage and antique
stores uh I was just in Berlin I was
doing that I was doing it in London you
know and yeah I you know I love uh
thrifting Salvation Army Goodwill you
know any of these places that we have in
many of the US cities the human line of
stores that I've been to in Europe and
other places I I try to find the small
unusual um antique places as well my
aunt's an antique dealer in Michigan and
she doesn't specialize in vintage
clothing but I I just love that idea of
discovering unique and unusual things
that maybe they remind you of times in
the past like maybe you find that oh my
gosh we had that mug you know back in
the 80s or whatever or in the 90s you
know things things you know can kind of
remind people of of other times so I
like that I think there's information
stored in in unique items beautiful I
bet Berlin has some really cool vintage
stuff really wacky stuff yeah there
there's a lot of of of really
interesting places to explore and I
think it's just so much more interesting
then some of the brand new kind of you
know stuff so agreed two more questions
do you have a favorite life motto that
you often find yourself coming back to
or sharing with friends or family either
in work or in
life I like asking people how can you be
kind to
yourself say
more I I ask myself that too I I used to
run a lot uh in Santa Barbara at Elwood
which is a beautiful trail that you can
go down to the ocean you come back up
it's like a Mesa more Mesa and Santa
Barbara and I would run and then I'd be
like God this is so hard and then I
would walk for a little while and I'd
think to myself well how can I be kind
to myself I mean like what am I doing
here does it have to be fast no like I'm
here to like decompress and like enjoy
so how can I be kind to myself like I
think sometimes I get hard on myself or
have very high expectations kind of
achiever mentality and it's I've learned
through the years that like it's okay to
slow down it's okay to like you know
not go go go the whole time you know so
I you know would ask other people that
as well like especially if they're
they're gone through a challenge or
burning the midnight oil or whatever it
is it's like you know what about
selfcare how do you how can you be kind
to
yourself beautiful final question I was
scouring your LinkedIn and I saw a quote
from the CTO of AppFolio in his
endorsement of you said that you were
the unofficial director of fun at
AppFolio is there a story that comes to
mind of something that you did at
AppFolio that created a lot of joy and
fun for the
team we had these hack days and I think
they do that to this day so like twice a
year we bring people together and we
copied and learned from atlassian I
remember we had calls with some coaches
from atlassian for how did they do their
shipet day or they originally called it
FedEx day changed it to shipet day we
followed their model and we'd had this
you know two o'clock on Thursday and two
o'clock on Friday where we'd build
whatever we wanted and we'd have a theme
and then we'd have goofy prizes at the
end that were like traveling trophies
like one of them was like a clicky clack
ke keyboard that we spray painted gold
by the railroad tracks you know but
people could work on anything there were
teams that formed we did it with a self-
selection marketplace right people
formed their topics and teams and one
team hid geocaches throughout Santa
Barbara they're there to this day
because we registered them with the
geocaching website another team built a
vintage video game machine and it was in
the dev room you know another one like
they catapulted they built this like
Trish is it a trebuchet that like
catapult this fruit in the parking lot I
don't know how we got away with that but
we were in the early days we did a lot
of fun stuff like that you could work
with different people build these larger
relationships which you know later makes
it easier for ret teeming because then
later if you retam you're not strangers
with people so you want to cultivate the
community so we had this department of
fun we would plan the fun in in a
variety of other ways as well so fun
Heidi you're awesome I think we've uh
helped a lot of people feel better about
the endless change that they're probably
going through right now two final
questions where can folks find your book
find you online if they want to reach
out and how can listeners be useful to
you you can go to heidy heal fan.com or
Google my name and I come up you know
Heidi Dynamic ring.com heidi. healthand
gmail.com you can find me I'm out there
and yeah I love to work with companies
and teams going through change and I do
that in a variety of ways teach
workshops do talks so if any of this is
interesting reach out and then do you
also consult and work with individual
companies or not I do yeah I do that now
I like to work on a retainer basis or
I'll even join a team so looking for the
all right for the next for the next one
so amazing and we'll link to all the
stuff in the show notes Heidi thank you
again so much for being here yeah thanks
so much lny bye
everyone thank you so much for listening
if you found this valuable you can
subscribe to the show on Apple podcast
Spotify or your favorite podcast app
also please consider giving us a rating
or leaving a review as that really helps
other listeners find the podcast you can
find all past episodes or learn more
about the show at Lenny podcast.com see
you in the next
episode